# XIII The Rigidity Cycle
*Anthony Downs*

[This is a chapter from [*Inside Bureacracy*](https://www.rand.org/pubs/commercial_books/CB156.html) by Anthony Downs, a RAND Corporation Research Book published in 1967.]

## Introduction

Under certain conditions, extensive growth in a large bureau leads to
a pattern of change we shall call the *rigidity cycle* or the
*ossification syndrome*.  This cycle does not occur in all bureaus; but
it is sufficiently important for us to describe its eight phases in
detail and then discuss its overall implications, using concepts
developed in the two preceding chapters.^[Many of the specific ideas in this chapter were suggested by Robert Perry of The RAND Corporation, whose stimulating examples and discussions also generated the basic concept described herein.]

## Why Some Bureaus Become Increasingly Rigid As They Grow Larger

The first phase of the rigidity cycle occurs when an operating bureau
(or set of bureaus) greatly expands.  The larger it gets, and the
faster it grows, the more likely it is that the entire cycle will
occur, though total size is a more powerful cause than speed of
growth.  As the bureau grows, its top officials suffer from an
increasing leakage of authority.  Their efforts to counteract such
leakage constitute the second phase of the cycle.  This in turn leads
to the third phase: a growing rigidity of behavior and structure
within the bureau.  In the following paragraphs, we will discuss the
specific causes of such increased rigidity.

### Control by Monitors

One of the devices normally used by leaders of the operating bureau to
improve their control is a separate monitoring agency.  This tends to
increase the rigidity of the operating bureau in three ways.  First,
the monitor imposes ever more complex and ever more restrictive
regulations upon the operating bureau.  As a result, the latter may
have itself in a virtual straitjacket of rules hardly conducive to
flexible behavior.  Second, the operating bureau must consume more and
more of its resources to satisfy the increasing demands of the
monitors for information and written reports.  Third, the bureau also
tends to devote ever more resources to figuring out ways of evading or
counteracting the monitors' additional regulations.  The last two
effects reduce the proportion of the operating bureau's total
resources devoted directly to pursuing the goals of its top-level
officials.

### Increasing Specialization 

As the bureau grows, its internal division of labor tends to embody
ever more intensive specialization.  This creates more difficult
coordination problems because more people are involved in each
decision.  Also, there is often a loss of overall perspective because
each task is fragmented into tiny parts.  Hence individual specialists
think less about making the whole operation work well, and more about
increasing the sophistication of their own fragment.  Finally, greater
specialization leads the monitoring agency to demand approval rights
over all major decisions as a means of coordinating "spillovers."

As a result of these three factors, it takes longer to get each
important decision made.  The bureau's operations stretch out over
time, and their flexibility declines.  True, intensive specialization
produces important economies of scale which improve the quality of the
product, and may even cause faster performance of each step in making
it.  But beyond a certain degree of specialization, greater speed in
performing each operation is nullified by greater sophistication of
each step and more time spent coordinating the increased number of
steps.

## The Escalation of Operating Authority 

The greater the hierarchical distance between low-level officials and
the points where final approval of their decisions can be obtained,
the more difficult and time-consuming it is for them to carry out their
functions.  Yet when a bureau expands as described above, key decision
points tend to escalate to higher and higher levels of the hierarchy.

This occurs for three reasons.  First, since each specialist deals
with only a small fraction of the entire project, authority rises to a
high enough level so that the efforts of many specialists can be
coordinated by one superior.

Second, top officials constantly search for more effective means of
control.  Therefore, if officials in one section of the bureau develop a
particularly effective form of organization, their superiors often
attempt to impose the same organization on other sections.  However,
this has three effects that increase the rigidity of the bureau's
operations.

1. A managerial form well suited for one section is almost invariably
   not as well suited for others.

2. When the managerial form is used by several different bureau
   sections instead of one, overall coordination must be shifted
   upward to a higher level.

3. When a higher-level official begins administrating this form in
   several bureau sections, he normally adapts it at least in part to
   the needs of sections other than the one in which it was
   invented.  This weakens its effectiveness in that section.

The third cause of decision-point escalation is the promotion of
zealots who are strong supporters of certain managerial techniques
they have found effective in lower-level positions.  They often impose
these techniques upon all the bureau sections that were formerly
operated by their peers but are now under their own authority.  This
has the three rigidity-increasing effects described above.

### The Result: Incapability for Fast or Novel Action 

As a result of the above trends, the increasing size of the bureau
leads to a gradual ossification of operations.  Low-level officials
find that almost all decisions are delayed for long periods, and
merely getting a decision made requires a great deal of persistent
effort.  Since each proposed action must receive multiple approvals,
the probability of its being rejected is quite high.  Officials must
devote immense efforts to filling out reports, carrying out
operationally superfluous procedures, preparing elaborate
justifications for past or potential actions, and hosting numerous
inspectors.  In addition, it becomes extremely difficult to get novel
procedures approved.  If a proposed action is radically new, it does
not fit control processes developed from past experience.  Moreover,
the need for multiple approval means that one conservative
high-ranking official can seriously delay novel procedures by calling
for more studies.

Thus the bureau becomes a gigantic machine that slowly and inflexibly
grinds along in the direction in which it was initially aimed.  It
still produces outputs, perhaps in truly impressive quantity and
quality.  But the speed and flexibility of its operations steadily
diminish.

## How an Urgent Task Leads to a "Break-out"

At this point, the bureau or one of its parts is suddenly instructed
by its sovereign to undertake an urgent task.  The task is complex,
calls for novel research or operations, requires many resources, and
must be accomplished as fast as possible.  Examples are building the
Polaris and Atlas missile systems.  Based upon their experience with
the bureau, top level officials realize that it is incapable of
carrying out this task.  Its cumbersome machinery cannot produce
results fast enough, and its anti-novelty bias may block the necessary
innovation.

Therefore, a new organization is set up for this task outside the
normal operations of the bureau.  It is much smaller than the bureau
as a whole, though it may contain many members.  These members have
somewhat broader capabilities and are more competent than the bureau's
average members, since they have been specially picked for this task.
They are also exempt from normal rotation "for the duration," so
turnover is low.  The new organization is not integrated with the
bureau's hierarchy, but reports directly to its top-level officials.
Moreover, it contains enough specialists and has enough resources so
that it is not dependent upon the bureau's regular chain of command
for major services.  It is exempt from almost all existing controls,
regulations, and procedures, and is free to invent its own.  Finally,
it has high priority access to resources, so its allocation requests
need not compete directly with all other possible users of resources
within the regular bureau.

Such a special organization clearly enjoys privileges that could not
be extended to the entire bureau.  It would be impossible for the
whole bureau to have smarter than average members, small size, and top
priority access to resources.  Hence the characteristics of this type
of special organization cannot be considered a blueprint for reforming
the entire bureau.

However, these special privileges allow the separate organization to
tackle its specific task with unusual ability, imagination,
decisiveness, speed, and low costs of coordination and
control.  Moreover, its members develop extraordinarily high morale and
zeal because of their unusual freedom, the obvious significance of
their task, and their ability to develop close working relationships
because of the bureau's small size and the absence of constant
rotation.  As a result, the organization's productivity is extremely
high, and its "break-out" from the regular bureaucracy usually quite
effective in accomplishing the job--at least initially.

## The Degeneration of the Special Organization 

Experience shows that special organizations of the type described
above rarely maintain their high productivity for more than a few
years, if that
long.^[Kelly Johnson's special "Skunk Works" at Lockheed Aircraft has managed to maintain high productivity over a long time period by continuing to operate with a great many special privileges, such as visitor restrictions, reduced reporting controls, and extreme secrecy.  I am indebted to Thomas K. Glennan, Jr. of The RAND Corporation for pointing out many of the special features of this uniquely productive organization.]
Their unusual concentration of powers and talents gradually dissipates
for four major reasons.

First, if the organization is successful in carrying out its special
task, it generates requirements for interaction with portions of its
own bureau, or other bureaus.  Once the special organization begins to
deal with more ossified bureaus, it must yield some of its
decisionmaking power to them.  Thus, the success of the special
organization often destroys its isolation--and therefore its
advantages.

Second, although the special organization is initially designed to be
nearly autonomous, there is almost always some vital function that
cannot be completely removed from its normal bureaucratic setting.  An
example is obtaining final approval for use of funds (as opposed to
final approval for technical decisions).  This function continues to
operate under relatively ossified decisionmaking procedures, becoming
more and more of a bottleneck as time passes.  Thus, the impossibility
of initially creating complete autonomy for this organization at
middle and lower levels of the hierarchy causes an ever-increasing
debilitation of its special capabilities.

Third, events occur outside the purview of the special organization
that are directly relevant to its assignment.  For example, while the
Air Force ballistic missile program was concerned with Thor and Atlas,
the Russians launched Sputnik I, the Navy invented the Polaris
concept, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was
created.  The Air Force missile program was caught up in relationships
with other bureaus not subject to its quick-decision procedures.  Such
unforeseeable relationships sometimes alter the whole definition of
the special organization's assignment, and subordinate some of its key
decisions to procedures outside its control.  Thus, the dynamic
environment of its task also prevents it from isolating itself for
very long.

Fourth, as time passes, other issues emerge that are just as
critical--or more so--than the task assigned to the special
organization.  As a result, the bureau's top-level officials begin
focusing their attention on other matters.  But its privileged status
is essentially based upon having top priority in their decisionmaking,
as well as top priority access to resources.  Thus, the passage of
time weakens the ability of the special organization to retain the
concentrated interest of the bureau's topmost officials, which in turn
undermines its special privileges.

As a result of these factors, the high-productivity phase in the
special organization's life gradually comes to an end.  It loses its
"special" nature and merely becomes another section of the bureau
struggling under the normal weight of rules, regulations, and
agonizingly slow decisionmaking procedures.

## Why Control Structures Persist Even When the Functions They Control Shrink

Based upon the continuous growth of the British Admiralty and Colonial
Office during periods when the navy and the British Empire were
shrinking, C. Northcote Parkinson concluded there was no relationship
whatever between the number of persons employed in administration and
the size of the task to be
administered.^[C. Northcote Parkinson, *Parkinson's Law and Other Studies in Administration*, pp 2-13.]
A similar nonrelationship exists between the number of persons
monitoring bureau functions and the magnitude of those functions.
Consequently, shrinkage of a bureau's basic activities usually does
not lead to a proportional decline in either the number of monitoring
personnel or the controls they impose upon operating sections.  This
disproportionate survival of monitoring agencies occurs for three main
reasons.  First, once a monitoring agency has assembled the minimum
necessary staff, genuine economies of scale may enable it to greatly
expand output without adding many more staff members.  Conversely,
when it contracts output drastically, it may still need to retain that
minimum-sized group.  Second, most top-level officials seek to
increase control over their subordinates rather than to reduce it.
Hence they may deliberately retain the same sized staff to monitor a
smaller operating section, knowing this will intensify control.
Third, members of the monitoring agency are sometimes organizationally
closer to the bureau's topmost officials than members of the operating
bureau.  Hence topmost officials may retain large control staffs in
order to maintain their own power, income, and prestige, or those of
their bureau.

If a bureau retains a large monitoring staff to control a drastically
reduced operating staff, the former can impose much greater burdens of
regulation upon the latter.  Hence, when a bureau's basic social
functions gradually decline in importance, its remaining operations
often become encased in ever thicker and less flexible layers of
regulations.  This result of a fundamentally declining growth rate is
fully consistent with our analysis in Chapter II of how shrinking size
causes a bureau to become more conserver dominated.

## Some Limitations and Broader Implications of Our Analysis 

### Why Bureaus Rarely Become Completely Ossified 

The preceding analysis should not be construed as a condemnation of
all bureaus. Unlike some of the severest critics of bureaucracy, we do
not contend that most bureaus are so ossified they should be
abolished.^[*Ibid;* and *The Law and the Profits, passim*; G. Tullock, *The Politics of Bureaucracy*, pp. 221-224, and Michel Crozier, *The Bureaucratic Phenomenon* (Chicago; University of Chicago Press, 1964), pp. 175-208.]
Observers who claim that major portions of any nation's bureaucracy
are beset by *rigor mortis* usually overlook the pressures exerted
upon most bureaus by their power settings.  If a major bureau becomes
absolutely rigid in its behavior, its sovereign will soon begin
hearing loud feedbacks from clients, suppliers, regulatees, rivals,
and allies.  Hence the bureau will find itself under strong pressure
to become more flexible.  The rigidity cycle is least likely to occur
in bureaus that are under strong and constant pressure from such
feedbacks.  Conversely, it is most likely to occur in bureaus that are
insulated from feedbacks.  This implies that bureaus in democratic
societies are less likely to ossify than those in totalitarian
societies.  It also implies that, within a democratic society, bureaus
that serve the electorate directly are less likely to ossify than
those that do not.  Excessive rigidity in such bureaus as the State
Department, AID, and the military services, therefore, may persist for
extensive periods.

### Why Bureau-dominated Societies Periodically Resort to Major "Extra Bureau" Efforts 

The rigidity cycle is much more likely to appear in communist
countries than in most western nations for two reasons.  First, most
bureaus in non-democratic societies receive weaker feedbacks.  Second,
the bureaucracies in at least two communist nations--China and
Russia--are vastly larger in absolute size.  Faced by enormous
hierarchies with dozens of levels, top-ranking officials are compelled
to establish giant monitoring bureaus that develop complex hierarchies
of their own (such as the Communist party).

In spite of their control efforts, sizable segments of the bureaucracy
in these large systems are likely to operate under what Tullock refers
to as *bureaucratic free
enterprise.*^[G. Tullock, *The Politics of Bureaucracy*, pp. 167-170.]
This denotes almost completely autonomous activity uncontrolled by any
top-level, centralized agents.  Bureaucracies in communist nations are
undoubtedly subject to at least some high-level control.  But the
leakage of authority in the whole structure is so great that the
pressures felt by low-level officials are often almost totally
unrelated to the objectives of those at the top of the pyramid.

In certain respects, bureaucratic free enterprise and extreme
ossification have the same impact upon a bureaucracy's overall
capabilities.  In both cases, top-level officials are unable to
accomplish certain high-priority tasks through the normal bureaucratic
structure.  Either they have almost no control over low-level bureaus
(as in bureaucratic free enterprise), or their attempts to impose
controls on these bureaus have created complete incapacity to act with
dispatch or innovation (as in extreme ossification).  As a result,
whenever the leaders want to accomplish urgent tasks that require
complex operations and considerable innovation, they must set up
special organizations outside the normal bureaucracy.  These
organizations then become subject to all the later phases of the
rigidity cycle described above.

Attempts to escape the normal rigidities of a large bureaucracy can
take other forms as well.  One example is the "campaigning" approach
described by Alec Nove in *The Soviet
Economy*.^[Alec Nave, The Soviet Economy (New York: Frederick A. Prager, 1961), p. 289.]
Soviet leaders often try to accomplish key economic objectives by
launching special "campaigns" that receive intensive publicity for a
short period.  Just as the privileged status of special organizations
tends to dissipate, so the energy invested in each "campaign"
gradually declines to a mere trickle.  Then a new "campaign" aimed at
some other objective is started.  This method of attacking key
problems outside the normal bureaucratic structure (or stimulating it
into abnormal activity) seems to be a response to either ossification
or bureaucratic free enterprise, or both.

These phenomena have some implications that are potentially useful in
the analysis of communist behavior.  For example, if a task is
assigned to a new organization endowed with special powers, the task
must be considered very important by the leaders.  Conversely, if it
is assigned to a relatively ossified bureau, it is probably not
considered unusually significant.  Moreover, special organizations or
"campaigns" are almost certain eventually to degenerate to more normal
status.  Experience might even produce a "normal" time-profile for
such degeneration useful in forecasting the future course of specific
programs.

### The "Reorganization Cycle" in Large Bureaucracies 

Another response to both ossification and bureaucratic free enterprise
in large bureaucracies is periodic revamping of control and authority
relationships between major components of the bureaucracy.  Such
reorganizations have four characteristics that create a "cycle":

1. They involve a reshuffling of relationships at higher and
   intermediate but not at the lowest levels.

2. They are effective in the short run.

3. Any gains in performance are gradually obliterated.

4. Reappearance of the original lack of control eventually stimulates
   another reorganization.

From the viewpoint of a bureaucracy's top-level officials, periodic
reorganizations are designed to influence the behavior of the
low-level officials who actually carry out operations.  However,
top-level officials are rarely able to revamp these lowest levels
directly.  They usually cannot inform themselves sufficiently about
those levels to make sensible suggestions for reform.  Also, drastic
changes adopted on all levels simultaneously might be too disruptive.
This was certainly the experience of the Chinese Communists when they
attempted "The Great Leap Forward." Top-level officials usually
reshuffle the relationships among major bureau components, but not
within each component.  Hence such periodic reorganizations rarely
penetrate down to the low levels where final action takes place.

Nevertheless, a drastic "shake-up" of intermediate and upper levels
may significantly improve the productivity and flexibility of the
bureaucracy as a whole.  If previously rigid channels of authority and
communications are broken up, the bureaucracy will find itself in a
relatively fluid state.  Such fluidity may release energies and ideas
that have previously been held back by ossification.  It may also
force free enterprising bureaucrats to follow their superiors' orders
more closely, until they can determine exactly how much autonomy they
now enjoy.  Therefore, major reorganizations are typically followed by
a short period of chaotic readjustment and a longer period of improved
performance.

But this "honeymoon" does not last. The forces that originally caused
ossification or free enterprise gradually reassert
themselves.  Officials set up new channels and networks of authority
and communications, both formal and informal.  Extensive new rules are
developed; and as time passes, these channels, networks, and rules
grow more rigid.  Moreover, top officials themselves further this
process in two ways.  First, they soon shift their attention from the
reorganization to other matters.  Second, they develop new forms of
control appropriate to the newly reorganized structure.  Eventually the
new forms of organization become just as unmanageable as the old
ones were.  As a result, the leaders' frustrations will gradually rise
until they are stimulated to undertake another reorganization.  Hence
large bureaucracies formed from many component bureaus will be
subjected to periodic reorganizations by their sovereigns or topmost
officials. Such reorganizations will occur most often in bureaucracies
that exhibit the characteristics that make ossification and
bureaucratic free enterprise most likely--very large size and weak
feedbacks from clientele.  One example of such a cycle is Soviet
postwar shifts between centralized and decentralized economic
controls.  Another has been suggested by Robert Perry of The RAND
Corporation, who contends that there is a definite seven-year
reorganization cycle in US. Air Force procedures for controlling
research and development contracts.

Most reorganization cycles do not exhibit consistent periodicity.
Nevertheless, the cycle concept could still prove useful in
forecasting the behavior of large bureaucratic systems.  If definite
stages in the cycle of a given system can be identified, then an
analyst might indicate the current position of the system in the
cycle, predict what the next stage will be, and estimate approximately
when it will occur.  Admittedly, the operation of such cycles is also
significantly influenced by both exogenous events and related
long-range trends.
